---
layout: distill
title: Cape Town
show: false
category: open
related_publications: false
date: 2024-11-17
toc:
  - name: Context
  - name: The Conference
  - subsections:
     - name: Notes To Myself 
  - name: Impressions
  - subsections:
     - name: First Impressions
     - name: Segregation
     - name: Kindness
     - name: Cape Town, Overseas European City?
     - name: National Identity and The Rainbow Nation
  - name: Stories 
  - name: Places Visited And Recommendations 
---

"*It looks like a movie scene where they tried to show that humanity is united*"

DISLCAIMER: All thoughts shared here are personal opinions and impressions based on the small amount of things I have seen during my five days in Cape Town. I did not do in-depth research on what I discuss, which may make my analysis very superficial in some instances. 


## Context 

In early October, Anas told me about a conference he would attend in Cape Town, South Africa - The Africa Tech Festival. He half-jokingly told me I should join him. Obviously, I laughed - as I'm in the middle of my PhD, with important deadlines coming soon, the middle of November 2024 was certainly not the right time to go a journey to the other side of the world. "I'll get you a speaker role at the conference, so it counts as work" he'd say. And he said the same to a couple of other close friends of his. In the end, not only he convinced me to fly, but we also did manage to get me a speaker role at the conference. I was offered to be on two panels: "*Executing the AI Vision: Fine-Tuning Tactical Integration for Maximum Enterprise Impact*" and "*Panel: Mastering the Market with AI: Building a Competitive Advantage*". And well, and of course, I accepted both. 

So here I am, joining Anas (and his friend Josiah, who also got seduced by Anas' offer and flew from London) in Cape Town, in the middle of November and PhD chaos. And oh boy - I don't regret coming. 

## The Conference 

This is, perhaps ironically, the least interesting part of the blogpost. 

My impressions of the conference are very similar to my impressions of Gitex (see my thoughts [here](/_posts/2024-06-04-gitex.md)). The African tech space is putting an incredible and inspiring amount of work and effort on the continent. What was interesting about the African Tech Festival compared to Gitex is that it was a different population <d-footnte>We didn't see a single Moroccan person.</d-footnote>. I remember Gitex to be full of Maghrebis and people from the Arab world, as well as many people from closer subsaharan countries, while this one was either Europeans/Americans or people from Southern African countries. Interestingly, there were more Europeans at this conference than Gitex - depsite the geographical proximity to Europe that Gitex has. It reflects a reality about this place - Europeans/Americans are much more present business-wise in Cape Town <d-footnote>I say Cape Town, and not South Africa, purposely. This city is a bit like London - a different country within a country </d-footnote>  than they are in Morocco. 

Regarding the content of the conference, and the average attitude of people - I'd say it really was the same as Gitex - lots of people talking about tech or other buzzword of the sort for their business, without solid understanding of what's going on. And of course, everyone talks about adapting things to the African market, and the challenge of doing so. Interestingly, I had a conversation with a man after my panel who complained about this narrative of "fixing everything for Africa" (as a reaction to me talking about the need to get data bases for African languages for Language Models etc..). Well, he is right in the sense that this narrative is a political one, that drives divide between the west and Africa. Local adaptation is needed in every country one thinks about going to - it's not only a problem in Africa. In that sense - why are we talking about Tech for Africa, and why are we not just talking about Tech, which we happen to talk about in Africa. 

But is this really legitimate of a thing to say? Can we really talk about "Tech" independantly of the Africa suffixe, when talking about it here? Well, I have mixed feeligs about this. The reality is that there is close to 0 Deep Tech here - no research, no novel development, and no groundbreaking creativity. It's always borrowing ideas and tools from the West, and adapting them to the local reality. 

I think the Disapora is key in this equation. Companies, and families that can afford it, should keep sending people studying/working in the west, and learning about what's going on. At the same time, the quality of universities here has to improve. We don't need African tech, we need Tech that happens to be invented on African soil, by African people - and Bootstraping our way through it the way we are currently doing it might not cut it - especially with how fast the rest of the world is going.  

At the end of the day, this is how you attract talents, and not opportunists. While Gitex and African Tech Festival have been amazing and inspiring, I feel like the wave of work motivated immigration here is more centered around opportunism, and the illusion of "faster, easier" <d-footnote>It's neither faster nor easier</d-footnote> growth <d-footnote>There is however less competition </d-footnote>. I'm always inspired by companies who do open-source science, and end up attracting talents along the way because they do cool open work that everyone knows about <d-footnote>Meta and Google are probably top examples of this, as opposed to Apple, or more recently, the wave of people leaving OpenAI. </d-footnote>.     

## Notes To Myself

* The second panel "*Panel: Mastering the Market with AI: Building a Competitive Advantage*" was a bit of an issue, as it was Marketing centric. I shouldn't have accepted to do this because I knew I wouldn't really be able to say much - and indeed I was right. But I managed in the end. I realized halfway through chatting with the other panelsits (45 minutes before the panel) that I was better off moderating and letting them talk about their field, and I managed to make that happen without an issue because our moderator was not prepared either. Perhaps that was the biggest issue, that we did not have proper modertation and time for preparation based on the questions. I think back of my piano teacher (Alex) advice: "don't ever play in public if you are not ready to give 100% - I always play as if Herbie Hanckock was listenning to me, because you never know what people film and put out there these days, or how they remember your image". I'm probably better off refusing (even if tempting) opportunities where I won't properly shine, rather than do them and be mid. In this case it was fine because I ended up doing ok, but it could have been worse. 
* I shake my legs when I'm eager to answer and anxious, and people saw this in the public. I also speak too fast.  


## Impressions

### First Impressions

Of course, you can't fly to South Africa without having heard about how bad the segregation is, about its presence 30 years after the end of Apartheid. 

I felt aspects of this even before landing on South African land. Indeed, the last 10 minutes of our flight, we had the chance to fly around, with a beautiful weather, over Cape Town. We oversaw, within the span of a few seconds, marvellous Californian Style villas with swimming pools, shortly followed by kilometers of slums as we were approaching the airport. Indeed, the airport is surrounded by them, and so is the city. The city is also filled with stunning neighbourhoods, and beautiful villas - and I am sure that I don’t need to specify which populations dominates each habitation.  

Let’s dive in. 

### Segregation and Disparities

There are three distinct “ethnicities” in Cape Town - the white South Africans (Afrikaners), the black South Africans, and the “colored” people.

I saw neighbourhoods, or restaurants where not a single white person was around, or similarly, where not a single black person was around. It’s evident that the mixing is limited, and that the different populations have their own lifestyles. Obviously, one instantly notices that the average wealth, education and access levels are much higher in white communities than black communities. 

The different communities of South Africa do not have to mix - they only have to respect one another. They are different cultures, communities, and this is exactly the strength of this country. While one may see a country where communities do not mingle, I chose to see a country where communities peacefully cohabit and work together to build a greater life - and that is incredibly powerful.  

Gabie, a french speaking black woman from Gabon who works in Energies, has been living in Cape Town for 11 years, and assured me that she did not feel any "segregation". Sure, there is often no mixing, but she never felt discriminated or looked at differently because she was black - and so since she started her studies in Cape Town. 

## Kindness

People were really so kind. Every Uber driver, every waiter, every local we’ve interacted with were just so incredibly kind. But indeed - we mostly interacted with workers in low-qualified jobs, and most of them were immigrants themselves from surrounding African countries (Somalia, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Botswana etc...).

Still, pretty much every interaction we've had was filled with what felt like genuine kindness. Not the kind of "interested" or "fake" kindness that one would experience in the US for example - small talk always felt genuine, and people constantly smiled. 

### Cape Town, Overseas European City? 

It often felt like we were in Europe. Oranjezicht City Farm was perhaps the most European place of all - it really felt like walking around Borough Market, or similar, in London. Indeed, the population was mostly white, and the habits, shops, decoration and vibe was all very Western. 

Antony, a pretty well established Brit in the African Tech space, who lives in Cape Town, described Cape Town as the entry door for Westerners to the world of Africa. It has most components of what Africa is about, but still is "Western enough" that the cultural shock is not too big for investors and techies - which soothes them into the territory. 

### National Identity and The Rainbow Nation

The Rainbow Nation - that's really what it is. Cape Town felt like an immigration hub, where everyone was welcome, and could do what they wanted. The African version of the American dream! What's most interesting is that this is felt accross all layers of society. I'll remember on the first day a conversation with the Uber driver who told me that he found in South Africa a place where he could live the way he wanted, free of the extreme social pressures of his country (Rwanda). 

So it's not only Techies and investors who come here for freedom, good work opportunities and peaceful life - it's everyone. 

What's interesting however is that this sense of freedom leads to a different sense of belonging and nationalism. The "nationalism" feels somewhat weaker because it's bather in multiculturalism. It's very obvious when we compare to Morocco, which feels significantly more nationalist for instance, with a lot less immigration, and a much more unified identity and culture - and a clear (peaceful) "fight" against the rest of the world. It's as if Morocco was this big football team, ready to fight against other teams. South Africa, in contrast, is not a football team, but rather a football pitch - they are happy to welcome anyone who's willing to play a good game of football.  

## Stories 

Just a bunch of memorable stories from our trip. This is me writing to my 60 year old self, and hopefully, my kids or even grandkids lol. Hopefully, Anas' kids too. 

* First Uber Driver: My first uber driver, who drove Anas and myself from the airport to the airbnb, was from Rwanda. He fled the country a couple years prior in search of better life conditions, and of freedom from the violence and civil war in his country. And let's say it worked quite well. He got married with another immigrant from Rwanda, and they have 8 children together. Yes, 8. Oh, and the oldest child is 12 years old - you do the maths there. But he did say that 8 was enough, more would be too much work otherwise. On another note, he had to pay "la Dotte" to marry his wife. Yes, flat cash payment to the family of the bride is still done in some cultures.
*  Free food: They just give free food here. Josiah ordered some rice and chicken, and they delivered 3 times the quantity he had ordered - just like this. Anas had the same when he ordered a Pizza, and got 4 delivered, for no reason. In general, it's representative of South African culture - they don't count there, they just are generous with their time, energy, and food. It's all "chill".
* Tetouan/Venezuelan Jew: While at the conference, this friend of ours (let's call him James) told us about this person (let's call him Rodriguo). James, who is straight, made a comment about Rodriguo being hot - no one knew nor had seen Rodriguo before. A couple minutes later, James comes back to us and continues talking about Rodriguo: "I feel like I've seen this guy before for some reason". Eventually, James realizes that his own ex dated Rodriguo right before him. It however doesn't end well. The next day, while at a party with the conference people, we actually see Rodriguo speaking to a friend of ours, and engage conversation with him. While he is a bit of a prick, we do end up vibing and chatting, because it so happens that Rodriguo's family is Moroccan, and that he visits every year, and knows every important person in the Moroccan Tech Ecosystem. Rodriguo's family, who is from Tetouan, migrated to Venezuela in the 60s after the Protectorate ended, and kept close ties with Morocco, effectively coming back almost every year. It's of the utmost important to his grandmother to go pray on the graves of her parents and grandparents in the Tetouan cemetery every time she comes back.
* Bird fly as high as bin bags: While admiring the view from our 12th floor appartment, I noticed a confidently flying black bird. It took me a few seconds to realize that it wasn't a bird, but actually a bin bag. I saw this as a metaphore of what this country was about: "a mix between San Fransisco and the Lion King", or a place where greatness is often very close from chaos and misery. It so turns out that Cape Town is filled with a specific species of black birds, called "Redwing Starlings", who have the peculiarity of having a beautiful orange color on the inner side of their wings - which is hidden when they are not flying. Anas called them the "Louboutin birds".
* Cheap Labour: One can tell how cheap the labour is with the amount of unnecessary staff that one can see everywhere - staff which really doesn't do much. Ever single room of the MOCCA museum had someone working there and watching over the art. Sure, maybe that's normal for a museum because one needs to ensure that the art is not touched, but it really was like that everywhere. It seems that tourism and a select rich few are driving the entirety of the economy, and enabling an ocean of not-very-productive jobs. Of course, all this staff is drafted from the big wave of immigration from African countries - and that's one of the things that drives this feeling of "segregation". All the lower-paying jobs are taken by black-people.
* Security: A good way to understand how unsafe Cape Town is, is to notice how much security is present everywhere one goes. Of course, tourists, because of devaluation of the REN, and a higher purchasing power, will tend to go in "golden-gated" communities, where one sees a very significant amount of security, all the time. The building of our airbnb had 2 security guards at the entrance, 24/7. Every villa is filled with cameras, and very likely has security-staff inside. 
* This life is getting weirder and weirder: Here we were, on a random Wednesday evening, at the Hyatt lobby in Cape Town, meeting with friends whom we did not know were in Cape Town, whom we know from London. Of course, it had to be at the Hyatt. 
* "Refa7tina bel dikrayat": Translates to "You elevated us with memories". Anas' grand grand mother used to say this to Anas' grandfather when he was taking her out to the restaurant. It was such a special thing for her to go to the restaurant, that while she was there, she was already acknowledging that this would become a beautiful memory. 
* G. and the very productive business dinner: X invested in G.'s company, and was to meet G properly in person in Cape Town for dinner. Being an advisor and good friend of X, I was invited to join them for dinner, which was a lot of fun. Halfway through dinner, when the mood had gotten informal <d-footnote>(X, G and myself are around the same age - late 20s)</d-footnote>,  G notices in a table nearby a very beautiful woman, and jokingly expresses interest and curiosity. I can understand why he went to speak to her, she resembled Louisa, and looked almost as beautiful as her. When the dinner finished, when went out, said goodbye, and while we were getting in the Uber, he jokingly hinted at wanting to go back inside to talk to her. X and I went on with our evening and forgot about this, but the next day we get a screenshot of that girl having texted him. Well done G - I owe you dinner in Morocco if you ever come by. 
* Saoudis doing Saoudi things: "How much redbull?" he asked to a walking-seller. "30 RENs (1.5 euros)". "Lower price, lower price!". Dude you're filthy rich wtf and a humble worker is asking you a very normal price for a Redbull - WTF. 
* Camp's Bay: We had our first evening at Camp's Bay, which he thought was absolutely marvelous of a place, on the seafront, somehow like Palm Beach in California. We dreamed about having a house there. But then we were told by someone that Camp's Bay really was just where all the "exited founders" retired. The new place to be became Clifton. Funnily enough, we visited an apartment in Camp's Bay - and yeah we don't really want to be there. Now we know Constantia is where it's at. 
* Berti: One incredibly sweet South African lady, Berti, sold us a few products in a cute little shop of a marvelous [hotel](https://www.thecellars-hohenorthotel.com/). Her family emigrated from Switzerland more than 70 years ago, and she spent all of her life here. She was very sad because she unfortunately cannot leave South Africa, because of how expensive it is for her to come here, given the devaluation of the REN. That was sad. 
* Kind and subtle waiter: While at the restaurant, Anas and I had a difficult conversation where he shed a few tears. One waiter was passing by to take back our plates, and saw Anas tearing up. A few minutes later, I stood up to go to the bathroom and she asked me "are you having a good afternoon sir?". Having answered (a bit too) positively, she admitted having asked because she "saw [my] friend crying". I assured her that things were alright, and she smiled, and that was it. So much class and consideration in this gesture.  


## Places Visited And Recommendations 

- [The Cellars-Hohenort](https://www.thecellars-hohenorthotel.com/)
- [Oranjezicht market](https://ozcf.co.za/ozcfmarket/)
- [Gigi Rooftop Restaurant](https://www.gigirooftop.com/)
- [Table Mountain](https://www.tablemountain.net/)
- [Lionshead Mountain, and Will's group hike](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfpFVv9595G_GZ6Pw32_Cg27K8p7gmG63NVEiwiak-5PVlaDg/viewform)
- [The Bungalow](https://www.kovecollection.co.za/the-bungalow/)
- [Club Koof](https://clubkloof.com/)

<!-- 

## Random Shit  



Notes to Implement

* Rwanda taxi driver with 8 kids who paid La Dotte 
* Chicken at the apartment given for free 
* This city is a mix between California and Lion King 
* the whole of Africa is here - and they all drive Ubers or serve food
* Tetouan Jews
* Birds fly as high as bin bags. You can’t discern between birds and trash. 
* Josiah’s obsession for power 
* The farmer’s market is as white as borough market ffs 
* National identity is not as strong here as it is in Morocco
* Buying diapers for two beggars 
* Door of Morocco
* Anas meeting the woman 
* number of people hired for nonsense stuff 
* La nana du Gabon qui nous dit qu’elle ne sent pas la différence d’intégration ou ségrégation, elle est ici depuis 11 ans
* Rich “exited” Germans 
* oiseaux louboutins 
* Randomly seating next to someone we met at the Hyatt 
* “Refa7tina bel dikrayat”
* People live peacefully together but same coloured people hang out with one another 
* “I need to go to therapy in French -  because anas complains about people in Arabic, complains about life in french, but is intelligent in English”
* Redbull discount please 
* Hammam émotionnel de Anas, and the waiter asking me about it while going to the toilets 
* Germain got the number of the girl - “I can understand why he went to her, because she almost looked like Louisa” 
* The rainbow land 
* The woman “Berti” who sold us the perfumes 
* camp’s bay went from “what a marvelous place” to “it really isn’t the place to be”
* Conference - I guess? 
* South Africa as a gate, European door to Africa - conversation with Anthony
* Watching Rugby 
* two parties in one evening 
* “It looks like a movie scene where they tried to show that humanity is united” 


White Christmas - Black Mirror



Places visited:

• Camps bay
• Oranjizt city farmer’s market 
• Table Mountain 
• Green market 
• MOCCA
• Hike on Lion’s head  
• Club Koof
• Gergeous George 
• cellar the Rohenhart, in the Constancia neighbourhood 
• 

Ideas: 
• from tools to systems
• Get the data that you don’t have yet and that you want to have 
• Guys to keep in touch with: Swiss guy + Investor guy + dude from lunch 
• Ali to out in touch with Maxime  -->
